Frontex and
the European Commission (DG HOME and DG ENTR) will hold the 2nd Global
Conference and Exhibition on future developments of Automated Border Control (ABC) on 10-11 October 2013, in Warsaw, Poland.Aim and scopeAs the follow-up
to last year’s successful event,
the objective of the 2nd Global ABC Conference is to continue
providing a platform for international dialogue and exchange of experiences and
practices on ABC issues among all relevant stakeholders, and to foster a
discussion on a comprehensive way forward. More
specifically, the Conference will focus among other topics on:Operational challenges and solutions;Risk management and vulnerabilities; Role of policy, harmonization and
standardization in achieving interoperability;Decision-making and business models;Research, development  and innovations;Societal aspects; Future of the border checks in view of
ABC-related developments and other facilitation solutions.This year the
Conference will also include an academic session, thus we invite academic researchers and technology
providers as well as consultants to submit extended abstract of original work on research and innovations in the field of ABC.
A paper can be presented orally or as a poster to be displayed within the
Conference exhibition.  Topics of interest Based on the
feedback received from last year’s Conference, topics of interest include but
are not limited to:Operational performance and testingVulnerabilities and risk
managementBiometricsTravel documents Identity managementIntegration of information
systemsHuman- machine interaction Cost Effectiveness AnalysisSocietal aspectsUser experience and
satisfactionTechnology, innovations and
development  Paper submission and selection Extended
abstracts should be up to 4 pages long (including references), written in
English and submitted to ABC-conference@frontex.europa.eu
with subject line “Call for Extended Abstracts”. Please use editable file
formats following the provided format and guidelines. These
can be 
downloaded.Submissions will be reviewed by a Selection
Committee comprising experts from the ABC Working
Group,
Frontex and European Commission. ABC Working Group members are representatives of the national border management authorities of EU Member states, selected Third Countries and international institutions (upon invitations), and Frontex. Each submission will be reviewed by at least three members of the Committee and will be
judged on the basis of novelty, clarity, impact, technical merit and
significance/relevance to the conference through blind reviewing. Thus, authors' names must not appear anywhere in
the paper when this is first submitted to the organisers. Authors of accepted papers will receive guidelines regarding how to
produce oral presentations and/or posters. Please indicate in your submission whether you would like to present
an oral or a poster presentation.The deadline for paper
submissions of extended abstracts on research and innovations in the field of
ABC has been extended until 8 September 2013.Important deadlines8 September 2013 (was 1 September 2013): Paper
submission15 September 2013: Notification
of acceptance20 September 2013: Final versions20
September 2013: Author’s
registrationPublicationAll accepted abstracts will be published in the Conference Report. 
