

The year 2012 saw a 50% decrease in the
number of illegal border crossings detected at EU level compared to the year
before. Moreover, at around 73 000, it was the first year since systematic data
collection started in 2008 that the total figure for the year stood at less
than 100 000.
The main reasons for these drops were
two-fold. On the Central Mediterranean sea route to the EU, 2011 was marked by heavy
influxes from Libya and Tunisia as a result of the ‘Arab Spring’ uprisings. Those
flows had fallen off by the end of 2011, and although arrivals on that route
grew steadily throughout 2012, they totalled only around 10 300 by year-end. 
Meanwhile, on the Eastern Mediterranean
route, migrant flows through the previous hot-spot of the Greek-Turkish land
border were largely stemmed by increased efforts by the Greek authorities. The
effects of the Aspida, or ‘Shield,’ operation by Greece had a dramatic effect
on inflows. 
Weekly arrival rates of up to 2 000 were
slashed to just 10 entries a week by October due to the deployment of 1 800
additional officers. While this drop in arrivals was offset to some extent by
increased detections at both the maritime border in the Aegean Sea and at the
Turkish-Bulgarian land border, the figures from these displacements fell far short
of accounting for the difference. 
This was due in part to increased efforts
by the Turkish and Bulgarian authorities. However there is believed to be
pent-up migratory pressure inside Turkey representing a risk of resurgent
irregular migration on that route when the Aspida operation ends. Consequently,
looking ahead, the probability of a resurgence of irregular migration on this
route remains high.
Meanwhile, on the Western Mediterranean
route from North Africa to Spain, detections of illegal border crossing fell by
almost a quarter (-24%) on 2011. However, at 6 400, arrivals on this route were
still above levels recorded in previous years. 
In terms of secondary movements, the drop
in illegal entry via the Greek land border was not reflected in the traditional
route for onward movement to the rest of the EU. The most established onward
route, via the Western Balkans, recorded a 37% increase in detections on 2011
figures. 
Nationalities
Concerning the most common nationalities
detected entering the EU illegally, Syrian nationals stood out in comparison to
2011 both in terms of illegal entry and use of fraudulent documents. Despite
the growth of this group however, Afghans remained the most commonly detected
nationality for illegal entry though their total numbers were down considerably
on the previous year (13 169 against 22 994). 
Afghans also headed the table for asylum
applications in the EU in 2012, though much of the 7% increase in applications
is attributable to Syrian nationals. 
Afghans, along with Moroccans, were also
the most commonly detected for illegal stay within the EU. 

