
General considerations
At the core of Frontex’s research
and development (R&D) work is exploration of the potential offered by new
border management technologies to meet the dual objective of enhancing security
while facilitating travel. The Agency proactively monitors and contributes to
developments in research relevant to the control and surveillance of the
external borders. Frontex also keeps Member States and the European Commission
up to date with developments. 
Effective border control has to
strike a balance between facilitating the movement of an increasing number of
travellers across borders, and promoting greater security for European
citizens. Innovative technologies, which are nowadays developing at an
unprecedented pace, can provide valuable help to border management authorities to
do their job more efficiently. Yet this important goal requires that border
control technologies focus on addressing key challenges. They also need to be
sufficiently flexible to adapt to changing circumstances and diverse conditions
along the EU external border, and meet the needs of the border guard community.
Moreover, in an EU with no internal border controls and with common external
borders, another key challenge lies in fostering interoperability, i.e. the
ability of different systems and national authorities to work together.
Frontex plays a key role in bridging
the gap between producers and end users, making sure that the research and
development community has a clear picture of the needs and challenges faced
daily at the EU’s borders. The agency facilitates information exchange between
border management authorities, research institutes, universities and industry,
via the organisation of projects, workshops and conferences. It also informs EU
research programmes under the Security Theme of the Seventh Framework Programme
for research and technological development (FP7) and provides input for policy
development.
In addition, Frontex is very active
in driving the process of harmonisation and development of best practices and
standards in border control, both operational and technical, in line with
existing and future EU measures.
Border management covers all
activities carried out at the external border to address the issue of irregular
migration. Yet the nature of the actions related to, and the technologies
applied for border surveillance (between authorised Border Crossing Points,
BCPs) and for border checks (at BCPs) are quite different. In order to cater
for these different needs, Frontex research and development activities have
been organised into two programmes, a border checks programme and a border
surveillance programme.
Specific considerations
One of the objectives of the Frontex’s R&D
Unit for 2013 is to create a network/working group of experts of the Member
States Border Authorities, specialized in the field of land border surveillance
(Land Border Surveillance Working Group). For this year the Working Group will
be focused on showcasing the existing practices and technologies in use for
land border surveillance (in the Member States where the experts are coming
from). Another priority will be the development of a set of minimum
requirements for possible rapid deployable, cost-effective land border
surveillance systems to be tested in Frontex joint operations 2014. 
In order to support the activity of the Member
States’ experts, there is a need of providing them with information on the
Industry’s latest achievements in cost-effective and fast deployable land
border surveillance systems. 
On these lines, Frontex launches the present call for papers, inviting
Industry to send to landsurwg@frontex.europa.eu
and to Zdravko Kolev at zdravko.kolev@frontex.europa.eu, by10 May 2013, detailed technical
presentations together with a white paper (pdf/word format, containing
technical specifications, descriptions, relevant pictures) of its latest
achievements/advanced technical solutions in this domain. The technical
solutions will consist of combinations of at least the following types of
sensor: radars, electro-optic sensors, unattended ground sensors, communication
systems capable to transmit in near real time the situational picture and warnings
on remote terminals.
Frontex will not publish the papers received.
They will be used as support documentation during the activity of the mentioned
Working Group. 
After analyzing the Industry’s submissions,
four to six companies in the field of land border surveillance technology will
be invited to present their submission to the Land Border Surveillance Working
Group in October 2013. The submitters will be informed on a decision, by email,
by June 2013. 
Please note
that the papers submitted by industry will be selected on a
first-come-first-served basis and their representatives might be invited to
present them. The invitees are to cover by themselves the costs related to the
participation in presentation.

