
The Frontex Research and Development Unit
(RDU) invites relevant candidates to express their interest in participating in
a pool of experts in the field of Automated Border Control (ABC). 
Interested
experts are invited to submit their applications in response to this Call for
Expressions of Interest (CEI). Candidates will be shortlisted for the pool on
the basis of their professional and technical ability and their capacity to
carry out the tasks described in the CEI. 
The pool of
experts will be valid for three years from the date of its publication (03/04/2013). 
Whenever a
contract is to be concluded in the domain foreseen in this CEI, Frontex, in
response to its specific needs, will invite some or all of the candidates from
the relevant shortlist, in order to ask for the provision of a detailed offer. Only
pre-selected candidates (included in the pool of experts) will be invited to
tender. 
This CEI is
exclusively addressed to natural persons
(individual experts). It is open to citizens of one of the European Union Member
States and Schengen Associated Countries as well as to Third Country Nationals.
Frontex
encourages applications from research/academia and business experts as well as
operational experts and practitioners according to the profiles defined in the
CEI. 
The total
estimated value of all the services related to this CEI is approximately 120,000 EUR.
What type of services and expertise is
Frontex looking for?
The specific
tasks requested from the experts included in the pool will be defined on a case
by case basis according to the needs of the Frontex RDU. It is foreseen that
these will include the provision of the following services: 
- Expert participation in meetings.
- Expert participation in studies. 
- Expert participation in pilots.
- Contribution to and validation of written
materials, including reports, studies and best practice guidelines. 
- Development of an assessment methodology to
evaluate the performance of ABC systems in the operational environment. 
- Project development and execution.
In order to be
shortlisted, experts must fulfill the selection criteria outlined in the CEI
and possess proven knowledge and/or considerable professional experience in one
or more of the disciplines below (please check the CEI for further details): 
1.    Forensic technologies — Biometry. 
2.   
Electronic
authentication. 
3.    Signal and Information Technologies. 
4.    Human sciences. 
5.    Information security technologies. 
6.    Communication equipment. 
7.   
Computing
technologies.  
8.   
Information
systems.  
9.    Vulnerability analysis. 
10. 
Legal, economic
and social sciences.  
11.  Operational research. 
12.  Project execution. 
What to do in order to be included in the
expert pool? 
Applications in response to this CEI may be
submitted at any time prior until 31 December 2015 (i.e.
three months before the expiration of the pool). It is, however, recommended
that applications be submitted as early as possible, as assignments can arise
at any point in time.
Applicants
should follow the below steps:
- Fill-in all the mandatory fields of the
online application stored under http://btn.frontex.europa.eu/form/online-application-pool-experts-automated-border-control-abc 
- Print out the filled in form
- Submit the online application by clicking
the “SUBMIT” button
- Sign the printed hard copy and send it by
post along with the Declaration of Honour to the following address:
Frontex
Rondo ONZ 1
00-124 Warsaw, Poland
for the attention of the Procurement Sector, with the following annotation:
Frontex/CEI/48/2013 – Pool of Experts on
ABC 
Incoming
applications received in response to this CEI will be evaluated at least on a
quarterly basis. The candidates satisfying the exclusion criteria and the
required selection criteria will be pre-selected and put on the shortlist (pool
of experts). Every candidate who submitted an application will be informed
about inclusion or not inclusion to the pool.
The complete
documentation related to this CEI can be downloaded from: http://www.frontex.europa.eu/about-frontex/procurement 
Further
information on Frontex activities in the area of ABC is available at the
Frontex website: http://www.frontex.europa.eu/. Relevant publications can be downloaded
at: http://www.frontex.europa.eu/publications/  
Information
enquiries about this CEI should be directed exclusively to the Frontex Procurement Sector at: procurement@frontex.europa.eu


