
Today, EU Commissioner for Migration Home
Affairs and Citizenship Dimitris Avramopoulos visited Frontex, the European
Border and Coast Guard Agency, and met with its staff.
“I am honoured to welcome the Commissioner at
our premises today.  I can safely say that he is one of the main
architects of the European Border and Coast Guard Agency,” said Frontex
Executive Director Fabrice Leggeri in his opening remarks during the meeting.

Under the mandate of Dimitris Avramopoulos, the
European Commission tabled in December 2015 a new regulation to give Frontex a
broader mandate in order to tackle the increasing challenges at the EU’s
external borders. 

“I am proud to say that Frontex has fulfilled
the expectations brought about by the 2016 regulation and we are now ready to
take up the new responsibilities,” added Leggeri. 

“Frontex is the most important
tool at our hands to manage migration. It is critical to improve security and
safety of the Schengen area. The reinforced agency will be a game changer in
our ability to address future challenges and deliver more Europe where more
Europe is needed,” said EU Commissioner Avramopoulos.

”Having a
common European Border and Coast Guard is a milestone and I want to express my
gratitude to Fabrice Leggeri and all the agency’s staff for their excellent
work and commitment,” he concluded.

Commissioner Avramopoulos met
with the Agency’s staff and visited the Frontex Situation Centre, which
provides an up-to-date picture of what is happening at Europe’s external
borders. 
This year Frontex will see the
new mandate come into effect later this autumn. The European Border and Coast
Guard Agency will be reinforced with a standing corps of 10,000 border guards
by 2027 and will become a core partner of the Member States, able to predict
and prevent future crises. 

The Agency will also have a stronger mandate on
returns and will cooperate more closely with non-EU countries, including those
beyond the EU's immediate neighbourhood. 
  