Dimitris Avramopoulos, the European Union’s Migration, Home
Affairs and Citizenship Commissioner, was the guest of honour at the sixth
annual European Day for Border Guards (ED4BG) organised in Warsaw by Frontex on
Thursday, 21 May. During his opening speech, Commissioner Avramopoulos praised
the work of border guards across Europe along with the role Frontex plays in
the management of EU external borders. He congratulated the Agency on its 10th
anniversary and spoke about the 30 years of the Schengen area.“I believe this is one of the biggest achievements ever of
the EU, as it touches upon the daily life of our citizens,” Commissioner Avramopoulos
said. “The creation of Frontex 10 years ago was the result of a
common endeavour to strengthen the controls at the external borders in order to
allow persons to cross the internal borders between Schengen States without
border controls,” he added.The Commissioner said Frontex would be one of the key
players implementing the European Agenda on Migration introduced by the Commission
earlier in May.Frontex Executive Director Fabrice Leggeri said the Agency
was already taking concrete actions towards implementation of the Agenda on
Migration. It has reinforced operations Triton and Poseidon by deploying
additional vessels, aircraft and helicopters, which will help save lives of the
people seeking to cross the Mediterranean.Some 800 people participated in this year’s European Day for
Border Guards. Over 40 institutions, five EU agencies and two international
organisations presented their work at an exhibition during the event. The
programme included panel discussions on the Schengen Agreement, protection of
children at EU borders, future passenger traffic and partner organisations’
cooperation with Frontex. Other attractions included a cinema with
documentaries about migration, a photo exhibition, along with a performance by
the Polish Border Guard Representative Orchestra.
ED4BG presents Europe’s border-guard community with an opportunity
to share experiences, best practice and common values anchored in Fundamental
Rights. It provides a forum for topical discussion, exchange of views between
key border-management players.
