
Common Core Curriculum, basic training content for Border Guards, was presented today in Frontex Partnership Academy in Cesena (Italy). “After two years of development under Frontex lead, the Common Core Curriculum is ready for implementation into national training systems in all the EU member states and Schengen associated countries,” said Ilkka Laitinen, executive director of Frontex. ”Principles of integrated border management are the same everywhere in the EU. Training for our officers should be therefore the same in order to enable smooth cooperation during joint operations coordinated by Frontex”. The curriculum has been developed with the support of over 40 experts from 21 countries and consultancy from universities and international organisations such as UNHCR, IOM or CPT (Committee for the Prevention of Torture). A harmonised approach to the curriculum development was ensured by transferring best practices and knowledge in border guarding from member states, involving the NGOs and consulting universities on pedagogical and education issues. The training of border guard officers based on the Common Core Curriculum guarantees common quality measurable standards comparable within all the EU member states and Schengen Associated Countries. As the Common Core Curriculum is structured into four pillars: (i) general part, (ii) air border, (iii) land border and (iv) sea border modules, which complie with different training systems. The Common Core Curriculum for EU Border Guard basic training is a successor of the first CCC for border guard training. Its development was launched on the basis of the Seville European Council decision of June 2002. The first CCC was ready for implementation in the EU member states and Schengen Associated Countries on 15 June 2004. The implementation into training systems was monitored and as a result it was recommended to update the CCC for border guard training. Thus the CCC for EU border guard basic training was developed in 2006-2007. In order to ensure the comparability of trainings and flexibility of implementation respecting national differences, the knowledge and skills which border guard officers gain during the basic training are described. Instead of quantity (e.g. number of lessons), quality is emphasised. During the development process up to the date and scientific principles were followed. The CCC is in line with European educational policies and respects the Copenhagen and Bologna processes. The implementation into national training systems as recommended in the Schengen Borders Code is supported by Frontex and European Commission. The implementation of the CCC will be further monitored and evaluated by Frontex in cooperation with MS and EU agencies as well as in cooperation with universities and educational experts. 

