
Frontex
Deputy Executive Director Berndt Körner and Nicola Bertolini of the European
Commission, together with representatives of EASO, IOM and UNHCR launched an EU-funded
programme for pre-accession assistance in the field of migration management during
an official kick-off conference in Belgrade. 

This
regional support programme for the countries of the Western Balkans and Turkey aims
to establish a harmonized, effective and protection-sensitive migration
management in line with EU standards. 

Last
year, over 1 million migrants and refugees entered the EU mainly via Greece but
also via Italy. Countries of Western Balkans were heavily affected by the
movements of hundreds of thousands of people coming via Turkey. 

“The
migratory pressure on the countries of the Western Balkans has clearly
demonstrated the need to strengthen border management capacities in this
region. We need to build resilience of the national authorities to cope better
with this type of situations in the future, but also to reinforce their bid to
joining the EU and Schengen,” said Frontex Deputy Executive Director Berndt
Körner.

The
programme’s focus is to build the capacity of the countries in the Western
Balkans and Turkey and help them improve border management systems in line with
EU standards. Since the programme includes so many different elements, Frontex,
the European Asylum Support Office, International Organisation for Migration
and UNHCR will all be involved in its implementation. 

“The
humanitarian situation of the migrants along the Western Balkans route calls
for urgent action using all available EU and national means to alleviate it.
The current contingency planning provides a significant funding to support
countries facing large numbers of refugees and migrants. The programme launched
today is complementary and provides sustainable solutions for the future,” said
Körner.

Effective
border management includes sound border checks and surveillance capacity,
identification and registration of migrants, identification of vulnerable
groups and people seeking international protection, as well as well functioning
asylum procedures.

“Last
but not least, effective border management requires a system to return those
who are not eligible for asylum back to their home countries,” said Körner. 


