
Today, Frontex Executive Director Fabrice
Leggeri, together with the EU Commissioner for Migration, Home Affairs and
Citizenship Dimitris Avramopoulos, Italian Minister of Interior Angelino
Alfano, Central Director for Immigration and Border Police Giovanni Pinto inaugurated
the opening of the new premises of the European Regional Task Force (EURTF) in
Catania, Sicily.
The ceremony also included Director General
of Public Security, Head of National Police Alessandro Pansa, Mayor of Catania Enzo
Bianco and the heads of three other EU Agencies – European Asylum Support
Office (EASO), Europol and the European Union's Judicial Cooperation Unit
(Eurojust) - as well as of EUNAVFOR MED Operation SOPHIA.
Frontex has recently concluded all necessary
agreements with the municipality of Catania in order to be able to host other
EU Agencies in the EURTF premises. Frontex offers its European partners the
secure offices with modern equipment and computer networks.  
“I would like
to stress that our agencies have already been working here in Catania for a
year, but now the local authorities have given us the premises from which our
agencies can work more efficiently,” said Frontex Executive Director Fabrice
Leggeri. 
“The extraordinary migratory pressure on
Italy and Greece has clearly demonstrated that it is a European challenge which
requires a European response,” he added.
The EURTF was set up in June 2015 as part of
the hotspot approach recommended by the European Commission’s Agenda on
Migration to coordinate the work of the EU agencies involved in the management
of migration crises in the most affected member states. 
The office in Catania currently hosts 20
officers from Frontex, EASO, EUROPOL and EUNAVFOR Med. The six Frontex officers
at EURTF are working closely with the Italian authorities responsible for
operational coordination, intelligence-gathering and the fight against people
smuggling and human trafficking networks. 
In the framework of operation Triton Frontex
supports the Italian authorities with border surveillance and participation in search
and rescue operations, as well as with registration and identification of
migrants. Frontex currently deploys ten vessels and patrol boats, four aircraft, two
helicopters and 334 officers. Twenty-five EU member states take part in this operation. 
“The aim of the EURTF is to bring EU agencies
closer to the areas most affected by heavy migratory flows,” Leggeri said. 
EURTF will also provide logistical and operational
support both to the experts and technical equipment deployed in Frontex-coordinated
joint operation Triton and Europol-led Joint Operational Team MARE, which
focuses on organised crime groups involved in migrant smuggling by boat across
the Mediterranean Sea.

