
Frontex Research and Development Unit (RDU)
decided to enlarge the IDCHECK 2013 Project External Quality Assurance Group in
order to ensure that all fields of expertise required by the IDCHECK 2013
project are adequately covered.
Therefore, Frontex Research and Development
Unit (RDU) invites relevant experts to express their interest to participate as
a member of the External Quality Assurance Group for the project IDCHECK 2013
on Research on countering identity and document
fraud and improving tactical/operational risk assessment in the first line of
border control.
The general medium-long term objectives of
the IDCHECKS 2013 Project are: 
A.    
To improve capabilities to
detect identity/document fraud and to perform tactical/operational risk
assessment in the first line of border control
B.    
To develop a method for
assessing and improving the capacity of Member States to face upcoming
challenges in identity, document, and risk assessment, and in particular:i.   to identify and study capability-based (human/machine)
vulnerabilities and risks, 
ii.   to design and test mitigation and countermeasures, andiii.   to recommend solutions to improve security (decrease false
acceptance rate – decrease the number of document or identity abusers who cross
undetected – while minimizing false rejection rate) in the first line of border
control 
C.    
To disseminate information on
challenges and potential solutions to counter identity and document fraud and
assess risk at the border
D.   
To support the work of the EU
Document Fraud Project (EDF), training in falsified documents, and operational
activities in the area 
Role of the IDCHECK 2013 External Quality
Assurance Group
The task of the External Quality Assurance
Group is to independently and objectively review and evaluate draft
deliverables of the project in terms of technical quality (content, form,
structure and to make recommendations regarding the acceptance/rejection of final
outputs), including:
·         
a
research note on issues related to the fight against document and identity
fraud in the first line of border control,
·         
a research
study on existing methodologies and guidelines to assess operational
capabilities, vulnerabilities, and countermeasures in countering identity and
document fraud and risk assessment at the border,
·         
a technical
study on the performance of existing automated document inspection equipments
and a research note on the Strengths and Weaknesses of Automated Document
Inspection Systems,
·         
a research
study on the impact of decision support/aids for the performance of risk
assessment and decision-making of the border guards.
The Group is composed of experts from
research and industry and serves as a technical peer-review mechanism in
support of the Frontex Project team and of the IDCHECK2013 operational End-Users
Group.
Tasks of the Individual Experts Members of
the External Quality Assurance Group
Experts who accept to be members of the
External Quality Assurance Group agree to:
-       Independently and objectively review according to a specific
quality control system (taking into consideration content, structure, currency,
balance, completeness, neutrality, sources and citation, proofreading,
compliance with research standards) and make duly substantiated recommendations
regarding the acceptance/rejection of draft and final deliverables
(studies/research notes/reports ONLY for public release) by an agreed deadline.
The number of deliverables to be reviewed shall not exceed 3 during 2013; and
the deadline shall be announced at least 3 weeks before the expiry. 
-       Be
recognized as a
member of the Frontex IDCHECK 2013 External Quality Assurance Group in official
publications/presentations.
-       Actively
participate in
meetings or remote discussions (online) and, if requested, offer advice on
relevant topics. However, Members of the External Quality Assurance Group may
not participate in project-related activities (ex. Outsourced studies,
simulations/exercises, etc.)
-       Act
solely as an individual expert and not
as a representative of the company/institutions he/she is employed by. Before
each review task, the expert will be asked to sign a conflict of interest and
confidentiality declaration and may be excluded from the specific task at
discretion of the IDCHECK2013 Project Manager if a potential for conflict is envisaged.

Expert Requirements 
The Group aims to be composed of a maximum of
15 experts. 5 experts may be assigned to peer-review one deliverable depending
on the specific competence of the experts. Frontex reserves the right to decide
which experts will be assigned to which review.
The expert should have proven experience in
similar peer-review activities and competence in ONE or MORE of these areas:
-       Physical and Optical security of travel
documents
-       Electronic security of travel documents
-       Physical, Optical and electronic travel
documents inspection systems
-       Face and fingerprint biometrics 
-       Risk and vulnerabilities assessment of
Security Systems
-       Human-Machine Interaction and Decision-making

Furthermore, the expert must be fluent in
speaking, reading and writing in English.
Frontex reserves the right to select the
appropriate experts so to guarantee a representation of all the above-mentioned
subject-disciplines in the Group.  
Location and Duration
Most of the tasks to
be provided by the experts can be done at their own premises. 
Experts may be invited to attend meetings in Warsaw or elsewhere in Europe.
Members are appointed to the panel for a term
of one year and may serve up to three consecutive terms.
Conditions 
Selected Experts will be formally recognized
in every study or research note they reviewed and commented on.
Selected Experts will NOT be remunerated for
their peer-review activities. If invited to meetings in Warsaw or elsewhere, their
travel, accommodation, and per diem expenses will be reimbursed as per Frontex
Reimbursement Rules. 
Selection
Interested experts shall apply online at http://btn.frontex.europa.eu/form/idcheck2013-quality-assurance-group-expression-interest by 27
March. 
Notification of acceptance/rejection will be
communicated by 5 April.
Selected experts will then be invited to
attend the public part of the IDCHECK2013 Kick-off meeting that will take place
in Warsaw in April. Travel expenses to attend this meeting will be reimbursed. 



For more information
concerning this invitation and the project, please write to idcheck2013@frontex.europa.eu  or contact Ana Sofia Esteves at +48-22-205 9641.
