In the first quarter of 2015 over 44 000
irregular migrants were detected crossing borders between Western Balkans
countries (Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Albania, FYR Macedonia and
Kosovo) and between Western Balkan countries and their EU neighbours. 

It is noteworthy that of the 44 000
detected migrants, more than 27 500 were nationals of the Western Balkans. 
At the EU external borders, Greek and
Hungarian borders were the most affected. Albanians were the most frequently
detected nationality at the Greek-Albanian border, contributing to the
well-known circular migration between the two countries.  The Hungarian –Serbian border was affected by
a very high influx of migrants from Kosovo* (over 20 000), who constituted over
62% of the flow. The nationalities of the remaining 38% of the migrants
detected at this border corresponded closely to the nationalities of migrants
who had arrived from Turkey to the Greek islands. The majority of the
transiting migrants were Syrian and Afghan nationals, but there were also
growing numbers of Iraqis, Pakistanis and Somalis, as well as Bangladeshi and
Iranians. Upon detection, both regional and transiting migrants claimed asylum
in Hungary, but few remained in the country to complete the process. 
The high numbers of Afghans (over 6 000 in
the first quarter of 2015), who were detected first in Greece and then in the
Western Balkans can be partially explained by the changing status of Afghan
migrants already living in the third countries. One contributing factor may be
the expiry at the end of June 2015 of resident visas of over 500 000 Afghans
currently living in Iran. It is unclear how many will have their visas renewed
given the plans of the Iranian government to repatriate foreigners living on
its territory.  Another important
development is the tightening of labour laws in Saudi Arabia, where many
Afghans work. All these factors, combined with the uncertain security situation
in Afghanistan, contribute to the movement of nationals of Afghanistan towards
the EU.
The increased flow of migrants arriving in
Greece and continuing their journey via the Western Balkans fuels the
development of people smuggling networks in the region. Between January and
March, over 500 facilitators were detected, which constitutes a slight increase
from the previous quarter. Over 70% of these facilitators were nationals of
Western Balkan countries, in particular Serbia. 
As in 2014, Kosovo citizens and nationals
of the visa exempt Western Balkan countries (Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro, Albania, FYR Macedonia) continued to apply for international
protection in the EU, in particular in Germany, despite very low chances of
being granted asylum. 
* This designation is without prejudice to
positions on the status of territory, and is in line with UNSCR 1244 and the
ICJ Opinion on the Kosovo declaration of independence.
