


Frontex Executive Director Fabrice Leggeri met with Nigerien authorities this week to discuss the deployment of the Agency's first liaison officer in Niger and cooperation in areas affecting border management and security. He also opened the workshop of the Africa-Frontex Intelligence Community (AFIC) taking place in Niger’s capital of Niamey.

“My first visit to Niger underscores the growing importance
of our cooperation with African countries in the area of integrated border
management. Niger’s location as a bridge between West Africa, Sahel and Maghreb
makes the country an indispensable and pivotal partner when searching for
solutions to common challenges that are affecting our two continents. Border
control is only part of the solution to the ongoing migration flows and we are
looking to establish new channels of cooperation between Frontex and countries
in Africa,” Fabrice Leggeri said.
“Of course, we already have a long tradition of cooperation,
especially through AFIC, which brings together Frontex analysts in the area of
border security with those of the partner African authorities,” he added.
As part of the efforts to
strengthen its cooperation with Niger and other African countries, especially
those affected by migratory flows, Frontex expects to deploy its first liaison
officer in Africa later this year. The officer will be stationed in Niger, work with national authorities to strengthen
cooperation in the fields related to
integrated border management and will also monitor
the migratory flows through Niger towards Libya. In
Niger, Frontex will also
work closely with the EEAS/EU
Delegation in Niamey and EU’s civilian mission EUCAP Sahel Niger. 
The AFIC workshop in Niamey, the fifth such event in Africa,
will discuss topics that include the fight against terrorism and drug
trafficking, transit flows through Africa and migrant smuggling. AFIC was
created in 2010 to provide a framework for knowledge and intelligence sharing
in the field of border security between Frontex and African countries.  
