Last year, the European Union detected
the biggest number of illegal border crossings since Frontex data-collection
started eight years ago. The record number of 280 000 detections was mainly
fuelled by the ongoing fighting in Syria, which has caused the worst refugee
crisis since the Second World War. Syrians fleeing their country were the
largest group of irregular migrants seeking to enter the EU.Most of the detections were
reported as part of search and rescue operations in the Central Mediterranean
area. Although border control authorities continued to save the lives of
thousands of people, smugglers increasingly used unsafe boats, putting migrants
in greater danger.The unprecedented number of
migrants also encouraged facilitators to use cargo ships to smuggle them at a
large scale. Starting in September, such vessels took migrants directly from
the Turkish coast near Mersin to Italy. This is a multi-million-euro business
for organised crime groups, which is likely to be replicated in other departure
countries.Another trend explained by the Frontex
risk analysis experts has been the increasing number of deliberate attempts to
involve merchant ships in rescuing migrants. This has prompted the
International Maritime Organization (IMO) to voice the concerns of the shipping
industry over its involvement in rescuing migrants.The profile of detected irregular
migrants remained relatively unchanged compared to 2013. They are mostly adult
males, although the proportion of women (11%) and children (15%) reflects the
fact that many migrants intend to claim asylum.More than 60% (170 000) of all
illegal border crossings were detected in the Central Mediterranean. On the
second most frequented route in the Eastern Mediterranean covering borders of
Greece, Bulgaria and Cyprus, there were more than 50 000 detections. Near the
end of 2014, detections increased sharply at the Hungarian land border with
Serbia, making the Western Balkan route the third most important irregular
migration route with more than 43 000 detections. Detections of migrants hidden in
vehicles seeking to enter the EU via regular border crossings surged to over 3
000, five times the number from the previous year. This jump was due to a
tenfold increase in detections reported from the Bulgarian border crossings
along the land border with Turkey. In 2014, there were some 9 400
incidents of document fraud on entry to the EU/ Schengen area from third
countries, which represented a slight decrease compared to the previous year.
By contrast, cases reported on intra-EU Schengen movements showed a 27 percent
increase to almost 10 000. This marked the first year where there were more
fraudulent documents detected on intra-EU/Schengen movements than dur­ing
border checks of passengers arriving from third countries. This was partly due
to the large number of migrants undertaking secondary movements within the EU,
often with fraud­ulent documents obtained in the country of their entry into
the EU. 
 
