
Today,
the Frontex Consultative Forum published its fifth annual report that provides
an overview of the activities undertaken by the Consultative Forum in 2017. The report also presents observations and
recommendations shared with Frontex, the European Border and Coast Guard
Agency, and its Management Board in an effort to further strengthen fundamental
rights protection in the agency’s activities.
The primary objective of the Consultative Forum
in 2017 was the further implementation of the European Border and Coast Guard
Regulation, with a special focus on returns. The Consultative Forum observed
three Frontex return operations and supported the revision of the Frontex Code
of Conduct for Return Operations and Interventions. Furthermore, the
Consultative Forum continued its work towards the strengthening of child
protection in Frontex activities at both the strategic and working levels. The
Consultative Forum stresses that child protection, including strong internal child safeguarding policies, is
integral to an effective and rights-based integrated border management. Furthermore,
the Forum issued a recommendation regarding gender mainstreaming in Frontex
activities.  
The
report emphasises the need for the Fundamental Rights Office to be adequately
staffed to be able to carry out its increased responsibilities under the
European Border and Coast Guard Regulation. It also encourages Frontex to
resume the revision of its Fundamental Rights Strategy.
The publication of this report
is in line with Article 70 (4) of the European Border and Coast Guard
Regulation. The fifth annual report of the Consultative Forum was presented to
the Frontex Management Board on 22 March 2018.
The report is
available here. For further information, please contact:Marta Ballestero, United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) 
Consultative Forum Chair 
balleste@unhcr.org 
Stefan Kessler, Jesuit Refugee Service
Consultative Forum Chair
stefan.kessler@jrs.net 
Frontex Consultative Forum Secretariat
consultative.forum@frontex.europa.eu

