
Frontex will expand
its efforts in combatting cross-border crime this year by organising two dedicated international actions focusing on
facilitated irregular immigration and trafficking in human beings. 
Frontex has already
been closely cooperating with Europol and EU Member States in their efforts
against serious cross-border crime. The agency took an active part in last
year’s Operation Blue Amber, a series of coordinated international actions called
Joint Action Days, aimed at tackling organised crime groups.

Frontex provided
the support for dismantling the criminal networks behind facilitated irregular
migration, trafficking in human beings and other forms of cross border crime
such as illicit firearms trafficking or stolen vehicles smuggling. Operation
Blue Amber led to nearly 900 arrests and a seizure of more than 250 stolen
vehicles, 7.7 tonnes of drugs.

In 2016, Frontex
will for the first time organise two Joint Action Days, one at an EU external
land border in the Western Balkans and another at external air borders. The
agency will cooperate with EU Member States, Europol and Interpol. It will also
establish a special coordination centre to improve the flow of intelligence
between the participants aligned with Europol coordination centre.

“It is essential
for Frontex to work closely with Europol and other international partners in
fighting cross-border crime, even as we deploy record numbers of officers to frontline
Member States to help them with the unprecedented number of migrants,” said
Frontex Executive Director Fabrice Leggeri.

“These two
challenges are linked closely together. Smugglers and people traffickers are
making billions from the desperate migrants and a large chunk of this money
goes to fund other illegal activities, such as drug and weapon smuggling,”
Leggeri added.

Joint Action Days
are organised under the umbrella of EU policy cycle/EMPACT (European Multidisciplinary
Platform against Criminal Threats) in close cooperation with Europol. They
focus on particular targets and threats at selected airports, ports, land
borders, main routes, criminal groups or their specific methods.

Last year, Frontex
supported five Joint Action Days organised within the Blue Amber Operation.
Among them there were two Global Airline Action Days concentrating on credit
card and ID fraud in addition to trafficking in human beings and facilitated
irregular migration. 


