
Warsaw, 10 May 2018 - Frontex Executive Director Fabrice Leggeri
acknowledged the publication of the annual report by the Frontex Consultative
Forum for 2017. 
“The issue of fundamental rights is important for Frontex and it is
intertwined in virtually every activity of the agency: from day to day work
within our Warsaw HQ, to operations coordinated by Frontex all the way to the creation
of training curricula for border and coast guards across Europe,” – said
Leggeri. “As the agency is undergoing significant structural changes stemming
from the new regulation, we are also looking at how to include various
recommendations included in the report in our activities,” – he added.
The report includes a number of recommendations which the agency considers
important. Activities, for instance, are underway to consider how to further strengthen
the issue of gender mainstreaming in the activities of the agency – both within
the organisation and in the operational context. 
“I am pleased to have
Save the Children as the new member of our Consultative Forum. With the
increasing number of unaccompanied children at external borders, Frontex is looking
to address the issue of child protection even more intensively,” – he added. 
“The significant
changes in the Frontex regulation will also result in the new Fundamental
Rights strategy which I am looking forward to developing together with the
Consultative Forum ”– said Leggeri.  
Since the creation of the position of Fundamental Rights Officer, Frontex
has significantly expanded the office - from one to six staff members - to assist
it in fulfilling the major new tasks included in the regulation. In addition to
that, three additional vacancies for the office of the Fundamental Rights
Officer have been published in April this year. With the complaints mechanism
successfully introduced last year, Frontex has intensified activities aiming at
raising public awareness related to this issue. 



The Consultative Forum on fundamental rights was
created in 2012 to assist the Executive Director and the Management Board of
Frontex in fundamental rights matters offering strategic advice on how the
agency can improve the respect for Fundamental Rights in all its activities.
The Forum consists of two agencies of the
European Union, four UN agencies and
intergovernmental organisations and nine civil society
organisations.
