Frontex, the European Border and Coast Guard Agency, has launched
a pool of experts who will support the return of migrants across the EU. The experts
drawn from member states and Schengen associated countries will be at the
disposal of Frontex. The creation of the pool is part of agency’s expanded mandate.The return pool will ultimately consist of 690 return
monitors, return escorts and return specialists. Its size was based on past
return operations, risk analysis and return activities foreseen for this year.  “Our ability to draw
on a pool of qualified return officers and experts will help increase
efficiency and provide already overstretched national authorities with much needed
support. This is particularly important in Greece and Italy, which received
record numbers of migrants last year,” said Frontex Executive Director Fabrice
Leggeri. In December, Frontex issued the first call for voluntary
contribution to the new pool. In the first round of responses Frontex received
replies from member states with contributions that met 57 % of the pool’s
needs.Return specialists will support identification of irregular
migrants and acquisition of travel documents, including cooperation with
consular authorities of countries of origin of returnees. Return escorts will support
national escort officers during return operations coordinated by Frontex. Return
monitors will carry out independent monitoring of return operations to ensure
compliance with fundamental rights. All the experts will be able to identify
persons in need of protection and refer them to the competent national authorities.
The return pool will also include specialists in the protection of children’s
rights. The profiles of return experts have been developed by Frontex in
cooperation with the national authorities and the European Commission. All members of the pool will be fully trained before their
deployment to ensure uniformly high standards in all their activities. The
training curriculum for the return experts has already been developed. In 2016, Frontex coordinated the return of 10 700 migrants
in 232 return operations. The agency also assisted Greece in the readmission of
908 people to Turkey.
Individual return decisions are issued by the judicial or
administrative authorities (depending on the country) of the individual
European countries and only those authorities can decide who should be returned.
