Frontex accepted today Greece’s
request to deploy Rapid Border Intervention Teams (RABIT) on the Greek islands
in the Aegean to assist the country in dealing with the record number of
migrants coming to its shores. Following a required evaluation, Frontex
Executive Director Fabrice Leggeri decided to activate the RABIT mechanism.Greece and Frontex now have five
working days to agree on an operational plan to be signed by the Frontex
Executive Director. The RABIT deployment requires Greece to provide a number of
national officers and team leaders who will work alongside officers deployed by
Frontex. “The RABIT deployment will allow us
to increase the number of both sea and land patrols, which means more migrants
will be identified and properly registered soon after they arrive on the Greek
islands. In other words, launching RABIT means upscaling Operation Poseidon
Sea,” said Executive Director Fabrice Leggeri.Out of more than 700 000 migrants who
reached the Greek islands from Turkey so far this year, only one in five was intercepted
upon reaching the shore.The RABIT deployment will increase
the number of officers and technical equipment, such as boats and patrol cars, deployed
on the Greek islands. The operation shall also have a new focus on security
checks. Officers who will conduct security checks by consulting national and
pan-European databases are to work alongside screening, debriefing and
fingerprinting experts. The RABIT deployment will replace
currently running operation Poseidon Sea and will cover similar operational area.
Currently, in the Aegean islands, Frontex deploys 16 vessels and more than 260
officers assisting in the registration of new arrivals, as well as border
surveillance officers, and debriefing and document experts.The 448 officers offered so far by Member
States in response to the Frontex’s most recent request call for 775 border
guards in October will now take part in the RABIT deployment. Unlike
participation in regular Frontex operations, it is mandatory for member states
to provide officers and equipment for RABIT deployments.
So far, the RABIT mechanism had been
activated only once, in October 2010, also by Greece. The operation at the
Greek-Turkish land border in the Evros region started in November 2010 and
ended in March 2011, when Frontex resumed Joint Operation Poseidon Land.
