

In
2013, border security at the borders between EU member states and
countries of the Eastern Borders Risk Analysis Network (EB-RAN —
Belarus, Ukraine and Moldova) and the Russian Federation, was shaped
by several interlinked factors.

Firstly,
passenger flow continued to grow, by roughly 10 percent on the 2012
figure, with the total number of border crossings (both entry and
exit) reaching 77 million. The growth was driven by expanding legal
travel channels — growing visa issuance and implementation of local
border traffic agreements — as well as by longer-term economic
developments in the EB-RAN countries and the Russian Federation
encouraging mobility of people and goods. Increasing traffic has
generated considerable pressure on border crossing points’ (BCPs)
capacity to keep the flows smooth and secure.

Secondly,
smuggling of goods remained a significant factor in border policing.
Data collected within EB-RAN countries, as well as during
Frontex-coordinated joint operations, indicate that the smuggling of
tobacco products was particularly common. Smuggling occurred
primarily through official BCPs; however, a variety of modi
operandi were also detected. These included so-called ‘ant
smuggling’ (smuggling of small amounts of excise goods and illegal
substances through the BCPs) to the use of rafts across the border
rivers to smuggle large quantities of cigarettes. 


Additionally,
cross-border criminal activities also included attempts to transport
stolen cars and motorcycles from the European Union to EB-RAN
countries. The illicit drugs being smuggled ranged from cannabis and
synthetic drugs either transiting the EU or originating in it and
being transported to the EB-RAN countries, and heroin and amphetamine
precursors being brought into the EU.

Thirdly,
though there was a slight increase in detections of illegal border
crossings compared to the previous year, overall in 2013 these
remained low when compared to other sections of the EU’s external
borders and at 1,316 accounted for only 1.2 percent of the EU total. 


This
is possibly due to the fact that the route via EB-RAN countries or
the Russian Federation towards the EU involves logistical
difficulties and high costs, especially for migrants coming from
beyond the region. Efficient cooperation between border-control
authorities on both sides of the common borders also creates a higher
risk of detection than other routes.

In
contrast to the rather low level of illegal border crossings, the
phenomenon of migrants being refused entry who then applied for
asylum and subsequently absconded from reception centres was the most
serious in terms of magnitude. The number of refusals of entry rose
to over 50,000, i.e. 39 percent of the EU total, indicating a growing
risk of abuse of legal travel channels. While the large number of
refusals of entry can be partly explained by growth in regular
traffic, two individual phenomena stood out in 2013: 1) a sharp
increase of nationals of the Russian Federation of Chechen origin
refused entry and then using asylum applications in Poland as a way
to enter the EU and then move on to Germany; 2) the continued flow of
Georgian nationals to Poland and further on to other EU member states
using a variety of methods. In both cases, the main entry point was
the Polish-Belarusian border. 


The
use of this modus operandi appears to be a significant entry
channel of irregular migration to the EU as it exploits possibilities
for legal entry while still absorbing a significant proportion of
border-control resources. The abuse of visas in order to work
irregularly and/or stay in other member states for longer than
permitted by the visa was also reported, including continued use of
fraudulent supporting documentation and falsified stamps to conceal
evidence of overstaying.

The
situation in Ukraine is the main uncertainty considering the
border-security outlook. So far, in terms of EU border security, the
impact of the crisis is limited. Population movements from the
contested areas, especially Crimea and Eastern Ukraine, are possible.
At the same time, economic and political instability may cause
changes to labour migration, thus possibly also affecting irregular
movements.

An
important positive development is the implementation of the
EU-Moldova visa liberalisation in April 2014, which can be seen as a
sign of enhanced border security and cooperation in the region
promoting bona fide cross-border mobility without compromising
border security.



