Senior government officials from a number of Arab and European countries, ICMPD, Europol, Frontex, UNHCR, the African Union, the European Commission as well as international organisations met in Geneva on 30-31 January to discuss future activities for the better Management of Mixed Migration Flows in the Mediterranean region.
This joint conference of the Frontex-ICMPD-Europol project entitled ‘Towards a Comprehensive Response to Mixed Migration Flow’ was convened under the umbrella of the Mediterranean Transit Migration (MTM) Dialogue and in collaboration with UNHCR. It was hosted by the Swiss Federal Office for Migration.
The conference aimed to identify joint activities for enabling cooperative projects between Arab and European Partner States on the management of mixed migration, with the support of relevant international agencies. 
The conference also served as the base to unveil the Arab and European Partner States Working Document on the Joint Management of Mixed Migration Flows. This Working Document represents the culmination of expert level consultations between MTM Partners on selected core areas. Agreement on its content paves the way for the identification of joint priorities and activities in mixed migration management.
The projects mentioned below serve as a basis for future Arab and European co-operation: 

The joint MTM Assessment on Irregular Migration Flows in Africa and the Mediterranean Region; 
The MTM map on African and Mediterranean Irregular Migration Routes (2006 and 2008); 
The MTM I-map, an interactive online tool that provides MTM Partners with a visualisation of irregular migration flows. The tool is easily updatable and provides a comprehensive overview of the current situation, both locally and regionally (with restricted access). 
The Arab and European Partner State Working Document on the Joint Management of Mixed Migration Flows, which will not only benefit EU member states and their Mediterranean neighbours, but will serve as a reference for good practice and enhance future and existing bilateral contacts and joint ventures. 

