
Today Berndt Koerner, the Deputy Executive Director of Frontex opened the
9th heads of airports conference in Cascais, Portugal. 

The conference, hosted by the Portuguese
Immigration and Borders Service, gathered more than 140 participants
representing all major European and non-European airport authorities responsible
for border control. 
The main topics discussed during the conference included threats to
airport border security, methods to detect forged and fraudulent travel
documents, foreign terrorist fighters and trafficking in human beings. Specific
areas such as Schengen evaluation and monitoring activities, risk analysis
forecasts, and cooperation with non-European partners and international
organisations were also featured during the meeting.  
“Border guards working at airports face entirely different challenges
than those working at maritime or land border. This is clear when you realise
that only last year more than 400 million passengers entered the European Union
via its international airports,” said Koerner. The obvious challenge for border
guards working at airports is to ensure that legitimate travellers pass through
quickly, while any kind of illegal activity is detected in a timely manner. “On
average, a border guard working at an airport has only a few seconds to decide
whether a passport or a visa presented by the traveller is not forged, whether the
baby sleeping in a pram is not a victim of trafficking or whether the person
attempting to cross our external border is not on a wanted list.  This understandably requires border guards to
have a remarkable level of training and skill as European safety is very much
in their hands,” – he added. 
Sharing of knowledge between authorities not only within Europe, but
also with non-European partners is therefore crucial. The annual event serves
as a platform for exchange of information between airport authorities on latest
tactics of criminal networks and effective ways to fight cross-border crime.  
Conference participants included European airport authorities, as well guests
from countries outside of the EU, such as Albania, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Canada, Cape Verde, the former  Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Georgia, Kosovo, Moldova, Montenegro, Serbia, Turkey, Ukraine and the US. International
organisations including Interpol, IOM, MARRI, UNHCR and UNODC were also represented
at the event.  

