
Frontex, the European Border and Coast
Guard Agency condemns any form of inhumane treatment and violence and adheres
to the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union. 
Fundamental rights are at the
core of all the agency’s activities. They are integrated into the Frontex Codes
of Conduct, the Common Core Curricula for border guards, specialised training
for border surveillance officers or officers conducting forced return
operations. 
The Code of Conduct obliges every
officer who has a reason to believe fundamental rights of any person were
violated, either by witnessing such violation directly, or by hearing about it,
to report this immediately to Frontex in form of a Serious Incident Report.  
All reports related to potential
violation of fundamental rights are immediately passed on to the agency and Fundamental
Rights Office, an independent body established to advise the agency and monitor
compliance with fundamental rights in all its activities.
Frontex officers did write such
reports in the past and the agency immediately contacted the authorities of the
countries concerned and informed the European Commission. It should be noted
however that while the agency can suspend an officer deployed by Frontex, it
does not have the authority over the national border police forces nor does it
have the power to conduct investigations in the EU Member States. 
All those measures – specific guidelines
for officers, training, monitoring by independent experts, the Fundamental
Rights Office and Consultative Forum (an independent advisory body on
fundamental rights comprised of European and international organisations and
NGOs) are intended to make sure the appropriate checks and balances are in
place. 
Another such measure is the
complaints mechanism which allows anyone who believes
their rights have been violated by a Frontex deployed officer to lodge a
complaint. 
The agency fully abides by the
principle of transparency and provides access to its documents, to the general
public. In the past years Frontex released hundreds of documents to EU
citizens. 
The European Border and Coast Guard Agency is fully
accountable to European institutions. Frontex reports on its activities to the
European Parliament and the Council, and the two institutions exercise supervision.
The agency’s Executive Director regularly attends hearings at the European Parliament
and European Council meetings. Also the European Court of Auditors and the
European Ombudsman oversee the agency’s budget and its functioning. 
Frontex is governed by the Management Board comprising heads
of border authorities from all EU Member States and Schengen Associated
Countries and two representatives from the European Commission. 
The agency’s Fundamental Rights
Officer also briefs the Frontex Management Board on any incidents on a regular
basis.
Frontex acts within the remit of
its mandate, as defined by the legislator to make sure officers deployed by the
agency are properly trained, all alleged violations are reported and that
information on alleged human rights violation is immediately brought to the
attention of the national authorities who can conduct an investigation. 

