
Frontex and the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights (FRA) held a workshop in Warsaw this week to discuss ways to
improve the monitoring mechanisms for return flights from the European Union to
third countries and to effectively ensure respect for fundamental rights during
forced returns.
The EU Return Directive requires Member
States to provide for an effective forced-return monitoring system. However, it
does not oblige them to have a monitor on each return flight. 
“I would like to invite monitors from
various EU Member States to be on board of joint return operations coordinated
by Frontex,” said Frontex Deputy Executive Director Berndt Koerner during his
opening speech.
The role of Frontex in the coordination
of return operations is expected to increase with the entry into force of the
new European Border and Coast Guard regulation. 
“The current proposal for the new
European Border and Coast Guard regulation provides for the setting up of a
pool of independent monitors to ensure that all Frontex-coordinated return
operations are effectively monitored,” added Koerner.
The participants of the two-day
workshop included a representative of the European Ombudsman, delegates of the
Frontex Consultative Forum on Fundamental Rights, the Council of Europe’s
Committee for the Prevention of Torture, the International Centre for Migration
Policy Development (ICMPD), national monitors from organisations and
institutions involved in monitoring of returns, as well as monitors from
partner third countries.
Background:
Most EU countries organise return
flights individually, however Frontex can provide support with the logistical
side of the returns including acquisition of travel documents and co-financing
of the flight. The decision about who should be returned remains the
exclusive responsibility of the authorities of the individual Member States
taken in regard to each person. During joint return flights coordinated by
Frontex, returnees are always accompanied by escort officers from the EU
member state which returns the persons to their countries of origin. 
Since the beginning of this year
Frontex has coordinated 70 joint return operations – double the
amount from last year. It is expected that the number will reach 140 by the end
of the year.  
For more information about the role of
Frontex in return operations see: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O6NO3b6liTs
http://frontex.europa.eu/pressroom/hot-topics/the-role-of-frontex-in-return-operations-zOL89l
 
 
 
 

