
Today,
the Frontex Consultative Forum on Fundamental Rights published its sixth annual
report outlining its activities in 2018. The
report also presents observations and recommendations made to Frontex, the
European Border and Coast Guard Agency, and its Management Board in an effort
to strengthen fundamental rights protection in the Agency’s activities.
The Forum
welcomes the fact that Frontex began to collect detailed data on the gender and
the age of persons crossing the EU external borders. This is an
important step that will enhance the planning and implementation of operations
and facilitate the identification and referral of children at risk.
During the year, the Forum focused on the role
of the Frontex Liaison Officers in non-EU countries in promoting fundamental
rights standards, including during a visit to the Western Balkans. It also
continued its work on gender and on child protection and safeguarding and
issued a detailed recommendation on the role of Frontex in dealing with stateless
persons in the context of its activities. 
The inadequate staffing of the Agency’s
Fundamental Rights Office remains a concern. The expansion of Frontex’s mandate
and activities exacerbates the need for an independent and well equipped Office
to ensure that the activities of the Agency are fully in line with its
fundamental rights obligations under the European Border and Coast Guard
Regulation. 
The Consultative Forum encourages the Agency to
revise the existing mechanisms to identify and address potential violations of
fundamental rights in the context of its operations, as well as to ensure that
its 2011 Fundamental Rights Strategy is updated.
The publication of this report
is in line with Article 70 (4) of the European Border and Coast Guard
Regulation. The sixth annual report of the Consultative Forum was presented to
the Frontex Management Board on 12 March 2019.
More information about the Consultative Forum
is available here.

For further information about the Report,
please contact:
Marta Ballestero, United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) 
Consultative Forum Chair 
balleste@unhcr.org

Stefan Kessler, Jesuit Refugee Service
Consultative Forum Chair
stefan.kessler@jrs.net 
Frontex Consultative Forum Secretariat
consultative.forum@frontex.europa.eu

