The conference report summarises the discussions and
key conclusions reached at the Second Global Conference and Exhibition on
future developments in Automated Border Control (ABC), co-organised by Frontex
and the European Commission on 10-11 October 2013 in Warsaw. Further
information about the conference is available at http://frontex.europa.eu/news/abc-conference-and-exhibition-6QJ0JK The conference
highlighted that the traditional border-control
model faces important challenges, resulting from increasing travel flows and
changing travel patterns. Within this context, new state-of-the-art technological
solutions can help promote more effective and efficient border controls. However, technology is not an end in itself but a
means to serve policy objectives. The European Commission drives forward the
policy work needed to further develop EU integrated border management with the
support of Frontex on the operational side, while eu-LISA, the EU Agency for
large-scale IT systems, manages the technical implementation of new border
management systems. The success of ABC deployments depends, crucially, on
gaining passengers’ acceptance and reaching high levels of usage. This requires
that, in the design of ABC solutions, the passenger should always be kept at
the heart of the process. Another success factor concerns the establishment of close
cooperation and mutual trust, notably between border management authorities and
airport operators. Such trust presupposes the recognition of a common interest
in facilitating passenger flows. But ABC deployments are not merely an efficiency
issue. Border management technologies have important societal implications and
data protection authorities should be involved in the design and implementation
of ABC solutions. Citizens should remain confident that their biometric data
are properly handled. Also importantly, the role of the “human factor” of
border guards continues to be essential in the operation of ABC systems. ABC is
not about replacing the border guard with technology, but about providing a
tool to support their work. Finally, ABC itself is not enough — it is only one
step of the travel process. The future lies in integrated solutions which rely
on the handling of data in order to facilitate passenger flows and maintain the
border security. 
For a more comprehensive and detailed summary of the
topics discussed, please download the full conference report here.
