Detections
of illegal border crossing at the EU external borders increased sharply in 2013,
rising to over 107,000 from 75,000 in 2012, with Syrians, Eritreans and Afghans
being the most commonly detected nationalities.   Migration
towards the EU in 2013 was characterised by three main phenomena: a significant
increase in the number of Syrians arriving, a steady flow of migrants departing
from North Africa and heading across the Mediterranean to Italy, and a sharp increase
in detections of irregular migrants on the Western Balkan route. The number of Syrians detected at the EU
borders accounted for almost a quarter of all arrivals in 2013 and at 25,500 was
almost three times the 2012 figure. Syrians were also the commonest nationality
detected for illegal entry in most border areas and headed the list for
requests for international protection. More than two thirds of all such applications
by Syrians were submitted in Sweden, Germany and Bulgaria. The Central
Mediterranean area was the main entry point to Europe for irregular migrants, particularly
during the second half of the year. Migrant flows across the Central
Mediterranean to Italy, and to a lesser extent Malta, were heaviest between
July and October, reaching a peak in September, though arrivals continued in
Italy throughout October and November despite rough sea conditions, which
usually prevent sea crossings at that time of year. With over 40,000 arrivals recorded,
the Central Mediterranean route accounted for 38% of all detections
of irregular migration at EU level. But while this figure constitutes a
significant increase on 2012, it is still lower than during the 2011 Arab
Spring when 59,000 migrants arrived in Italy. This route also saw several major
incidents of boats capsizing and sinking, including the October tragedy off the
coast of Lampedusa that claimed lives of over 360 people.While Syrians
and Egyptians departed for Italy primarily from Egypt in 2013, migrants from
the Horn of Africa and West Africa departed mostly from Libya. Among African
migrants, Eritreans were by far the most numerously detected, with over 11,000
arrivals, representing a four-fold increase on 2012. To reach Italy, migrants from
the Horn of Africa typically used a perilous route across the Sahara, travelling
onward through Libya. On the
Western Mediterranean route, detections at the Greek borders with Turkey were
at their lowest level in five years though this route still accounted for
almost a quarter of all detections in the EU. The largest numbers of migrants
in this region were either detected crossing the Aegean Sea to the Greek islands
from Turkey, or along the Bulgarian-Turkish land border. Again, Syrians
constituted the majority of migrants on this route.   At 19,000,
the number of detections at the border between Hungary and Serbia was almost
three times that of a year earlier and made the Western Balkan route the number-three
hot spot for illegal border crossings in Europe. 
