
Last year, an estimated one million migrants arrived in
Europe, accounting for the record number of 1.82 million detections of illegal
border crossings reported by EU Member States. The number of detections was more
than six times the previous record set in 2014.
A large number of illegal crossings were made by people who
were counted for the first time when arriving on the Greek islands from Turkey
and later were counted again when crossing one of EU’s external borders in the
Western Balkans.
The Eastern Mediterranean route, especially the Greek
islands in the Aegean, accounted for the largest number of detections – nearly
885 400. More than 90% of the detections, or 803 000, were reported in the
second half of the year. Syrian nationals accounted for the largest proportion
of arrivals, although the share of Afghans rose significantly towards the end
of the year. Iraqis were the third largest nationality using this route.
Some 764 000 detections were recorded on the Western Balkan
route, mainly on Hungary’s and Croatia’s border with Serbia. 
In 2015, the number of migrants arriving via the Central
Mediterranean route fell by about a tenth to 154 000, in large part due to the
fact that Syrians had switched to using the Eastern Mediterranean route.
However, the number of East and West Africans steadily increased by 42% to more
than 108 000. The most often reported nationality was Eritrean, although by
regions, the majority of the migrants came from West Africa.
The share of rubber boats used on this route increased last
year. The use of weak, overcrowded boats with limited fuel supplies by
smugglers seeking to maximise their profits put migrant lives at risk, leading
to search and rescue operations saving an unprecedented number of people. Frontex
saved some 40% of the people rescued in the Central Mediterranean region and
90% of those near the Greek islands in the Aegean.
The record number of migrants seeking to make their way to
Europe also led to an increase in the number of detections of people smugglers,
which rose by a fifth to more than 12 000. Moroccans, Spaniards, Albanians and
Syrians were the most represented nationalities among the people smugglers. On
several occasions, especially on the Central Mediterranean route, smugglers
threatened border guards and rescue teams to recover the boats used to
transport migrants.
The number of asylum applications in 2015 rose to an
unprecedented level of 1.35 million, according to EASO. However, the number of
return decisions issued by the Member States (286 700) and the number of
effective returns (175 200) remained relatively stable when compared to the
previous year. Albanians accounted for 17% of all effective returns, trailed by
Ukrainians (8.6%) and residents of Kosovo* (5.8%).
The Annual Risk Analysis for 2016 also describes a series of
alternative futures developed in collaboration with experts from relevant
stakeholder organisations. These scenarios may be used as a foresight
instrument at a strategic level.
The Annual Risk Analysis also points out three major
challenges to be faced at the external borders: an unprecedented rise in
migratory pressure, an increasing terrorist threat and a steady rise in the
number of regular travellers.
*This designation is
without prejudice to positions on status, and is in line with UNSCR 1244 and
the ICJ Opinion on the Kosovo declaration of independence.

