Frontex has
published a Code of Conduct for Joint Return Operations. The document, created in line with the Frontex Regulation, sets out common principles and
procedures for joint return operations coordinated by Frontex. The process
of returning people on joint return flights is governed by strict procedures to
ensure full respect for fundamental rights and the safety of returnees and
other participants. The rules and best practices for return flights are now
gathered in a single Code of Conduct.  The main
aim of the Code is to ensure that all joint return operations are conducted as
humanely as possible. A full chapter is dedicated to human rights monitoring.
This function is carried out on most flights by observers from international
organisations, NGOs or national authorities. The Code specifies that the
monitors must have access to all relevant information, including travel
documents of returnees and information about any special conditions, including
pregnancy or illness. The Code also clearly specifies that medical personnel
are required on every flight and if the escorting officers are not able to
communicate with the returnees there should be interpreters on board. The Code
stresses that the use of force should be avoided or limited to the minimum and
emphasizes the importance of cooperation with returnees. All participants in
Frontex joint operations are also obliged to report any incidents they believe
violate the Code of Conduct during a return flight. The Code of
Conduct was created in consultation with EU Member States and Frontex Consultative
Forum. It is based on guidelines for joint returns created by Frontex in 2009,
which contain detailed instructions for the practical implementation of joint
returns. Best Practices for the removal
of illegally present third-country nationals by air is notable not just for
its level of detail, but for the attention it pays to safeguarding the rights
of returnees. The document contains advice on everything from seating plans to
dress codes, luggage allowances, and even what food should served on the plane
to respect the dietary requirements of different religions.   Third
country nationals who have exhausted all legal possibilities of staying in the
EU, such as persons who have overstayed their visa or failed the asylum procedure, are subject to a return decision
issued by a member state. In 2012 over 159 000 third country nationals were
returned from the EU to their countries of origin. More than 2 000 of those
were returned in joint return operations coordinated by Frontex.  
Joint
return operations are organised when third country nationals are returned from several member states using
one charter flight. In joint
operations one of the member states charters a plane to take returnees back to
their country of origin. When there are empty seats on the plane, the
organising Member State contacts Frontex, which then offers those seats to the
authorities of other member states, who can use the same charter flight for
their returnees. People returned in joint operations are all subject to
individual return decisions from member states.     
