On
17-18 June 2015 Frontex will hold the 2015 Global Conference on the Future of
Border Checks in Warsaw, Poland.The
conference will provide a platform to discuss the practical steps needed to develop
and implement a risk-based approach to border checks, while enabling better
resource allocation and increased cost-effectiveness. The focus will be on
operational challenges and solutions, with an emphasis on the technologies and
services that could change the current border checks paradigm and their
potential impact on day-to-day operations at the border. The
event will explore issues such as: How to verify the traveller’s identity
in a reliable manner early in the travel process;How to identify, through advance risk
analysis, persons of interest who should be subject to further examination by
border guards upon their arrival to the physical border;How to bring together point solutions to
enable end-to-end facilitation; andHow to incorporate societal concerns
into a revisited border control paradigm. The
conference will also examine cutting-edge research developments in the area of
personal identification, which in the future could be used to advance technological
innovations in the border control domain. The
target audience consists of national authorities from the EU Member States and
other countries, EU policy-makers, international organisations, airport
authorities, carriers, as well as industry representatives and researchers
involved in developing innovative border checks solutions.A
programme outline will be published shortly. However, should you wish to have
more information about the event, please contact Frontex at: FOBC-Conference@frontex.europa.eu
   
Representatives
from the industry and research institutions are kindly asked to register
their interest in participating by 8 May 2015. Due to the limited places
available, interested institutions will be selected on a
first-come-first-served basis, according to the relevance of their work to the area
of border checks. Frontex reserves the right to deny participation to those
whose research and work focus is not aligned with the topic of the Conference. Those
who registered their interest will be notified no later than on 13 May 2015
whether they were accepted to take part. No fees will be charged for
participation. 
