Warsaw 2 February 2012 – In January, over 2 800 migrants were detected at the Greek-Turkish land border in the Evros region. This is a significant decrease in comparison with the summer months, when detections stood at over 6 000 migrants. In the past couple of years crossings at this border seem to reflect a seasonal pattern with a decreasing trend beginning in November and continuing throughout the winter. 
Lower numbers of detections during the winter months are in part due to the harsh weather conditions in the region. Low temperatures, high water levels in the Evros river and flooding in the surrounding area make illegal border crossing very dangerous, and for some fatal.
In January alone three migrants lost their lives at this border. In mid-January the corps of an unidentified Asian man was found in a village near Orestiada. A week later a young Palestinian died in a local hospital after being rescued from an islet in the Evros. A few days later, the body of an African woman was found on the river bank. The apparent cause of death in all cases was hypothermia.
Despite these and many other tragic incidents that have taken place at this border, people-smuggling networks continue to facilitate the arrival of irregular migrants. Intercepting and arresting facilitators is one of the goals of the Poseidon Land operation. In January alone 18 suspected facilitators were detained in the operational area. Last year some 130 facilitators were arrested in the Evros region.
The border in the Evros region remains the main entry point into the EU for migrants from Asia. In January, the largest group of migrants who crossed into Greece came from Afghanistan, followed by the nationals of Pakistan and Bangladesh. Migrants from North Africa are the second largest group, Algerians and Moroccans being the most numerous.
Throughout 2011, migratory pressure on the Greek-Turkish border remained high with over 55 000 detections by the end of the year. This was an increase of approximately 17% compared to 2010. JO Poseidon Land began in March 2011 as a continuation of the deployment of Rapid Border Intervention Teams (November 2010–February 2011) and will continue during 2012. The objectives of the operation are: To increase the level of border surveillance, to increase the level of border checks and assistance with screening and de-briefing activities. JO Poseidon Land brings together border guards from 25 EU Member States and Schengen Associated Countries.
