“Very low numbers of illegal migrants arriving to the Canary Islands and more than a thousand of human lives saved – that is the outcome of Frontex coordinated operation Hera III,” Frontex Executive Director Mr Ilkka Laitinen says as the operation is just finishing. During the two month operation, which started on 12 February, 585 migrants arrived to the islands, about one third of them were interviewed within the operation. Besides, the total of 1167 migrants were diverted back to their points of departure at ports at the West African coast, thus preventing them to risk their lives on the dangerous journey.
The operation Hera III ran in two parallel parts. The first part was implemented by experts from Germany, Italy, Luxembourg and Portugal that were deployed in the Canary Islands. Working together with Spanish authorities the experts were conducting interviews with illegal migrants. The aim of these interviews was to establish in what extend and how these crossings are being facilitated as well as to establish the identity of the migrants. Information gathered during the interviews enables national measures against facilitation of illegal migration as well as return of illegal migrants. Already during the course of the operation several facilitators could be arrested by Spanish authorities. The top nationalities established during the interviews, which covered about one third of all arrivals during the operational period, the top three nationalities were Senegal, Gambia and the Ivory Coast.
The second focus of the operation was on joint patrols by aerial and naval means of several Member States. The aim of these patrols, carried out with Senegalese authorities, was to stop migrants from leaving the shores on the long sea journey and thus reducing the danger of losses of human lives.  Two Spanish vessels and one helicopter, one aircraft and one vessel from Italy, one aircraft from Luxembourg and one aircraft from France participated in the joint patrols along the coast of West Africa.
“As our risk analysis shows, the migration flow towards the Canary Islands will remain one of the mostly used routes of illegal migration to the European Union. Therefore this route will stay in our focus and sequels of Hera III will be launched throughout the year,” Mr Laitinen adds. “Apart from the outcomes shown in figures, this operation was of great value thanks to the active involvement of West African partners and several Member States. I am also pleased to see increased national measures taken by Spain to deal with this situation”, the Executive Director concludes. 
The surveillance of the external borders in the region is being constantly carried out by Spain and West African partners. 
