Although some data
are still missing for De­cember 2014, the number of detections of illegal
border-crossing in 2014 as a whole to­talled about 278 000. This is two and a
half times larger than the year before (107 000) and twice as much as in 2011
(141 000) dur­ing the initial stages of the Arab Spring. This increase is
mostly connected to the increas­ing number of refugees and displaced people
worldwide, related to the ongoing conflict in Syria and its spread to Iraq,
which have cre­ated the worst refugee crisis since the Sec­ond World War. Following recent
increases, in December 2014 Kosovo nationals were for the first time the
migrants most commonly detected il­legally crossing the external border of the
EU/Schengen area, accounting for a massive 40% of total detections. This trend
has been linked with rumours among the Kosovo population that France’s decision
to remove Kosovo from the national list of safe coun­tries will make it much
more straightfor­ward to obtain asylum in this Member State. Kosovans and Afghans
were the only two major nationalities that were detected more frequently in
December than in No­vember, which stands in marked contrast with the normal
seasonal decreases seen at this time of year. Both nationalities were mostly
detected on the Western Balkan route while attempting to illegally enter
Hungary from Serbia. At this border, de­tections in December reached a record
of more than 12 000 detections, compared to about 7 500 in November 2014. On the Central
Mediterranean route, de­tections totalled more than 6 700, a de­crease compared
to November (~9 400), but still considerably higher than a year ago in December
2013 (~2 700). Each year between November and March, detections tend to be
lower than in any other period as winter conditions make it more difficult to
cross the border and to travel over long distances in general, especially in
Europe. On the Eastern
Mediterranean route, de­tections in December fell to about 2 400, a decrease of
44% compared to Novem­ber (~4 400), but still much above the level of December
2013 (~1 500). Despite the de­crease, detections on the Eastern Medi­terranean
route made headlines with the spectacular rescue of one cargo ship in Greece
and two large fishing vessels near Cyprus. All ships had departed from Mersin
area in Tur­key and intended to reach Italy. These inci­dents, widely reported
in the media, were not isolated cases, as in December a total of seven cargo
vessels departing from around Turkey were intercepted, involving a total of
more than 3 000 migrants. These cases, followed
by other cases in Jan­uary 2015, signal a radical scaling up of the means of
transport acquired by smugglers to ship migrants from Turkey to the EU. In­deed,
an increasing number of migrants are present in Turkey and ready to pay large
sums of money for their trip to Europe (up to EUR 7 000). The large profit
associated with low risk for the main smugglers, are likely to trigger similar
incidents in the future.
 
