Today the African migrants who survived the traumatic events
off the coast of Libya told Frontex debriefing officers that smugglers who
organised the operation forced them at gunpoint onto the inflatable rafts.The interviewed migrants were among the more than 400 people
who boarded four dinghies on a beach near Tripoli on Saturday night and headed
for Italy. The survivors told officials that the smugglers threatened to shoot
on the spot anyone who refused to get into the four inflatable rafts.The Italian Coast Guard assisted by vessels participating in
the Operation Triton rescued 105 people on one of the vessels on Monday, although
29 of them died on hypothermia. The Coast Guard later redirected two merchant vessels to
rescue nine more survivors from the other rafts. The rest of the migrants
likely perished in the treacherous winter sea.“These stories point to an awful crime. The criminals threatened the
migrants with violence to board these flimsy rubber boats, knowing very well
that the chances of their survival in such difficult weather conditions were
slim,” said Frontex Executive Director Fabrice Leggeri. “In this terrifying tragedy
one can only wonder whether for these criminal this was a terrible accident, or
part of a deliberate strategy”- he concluded.The Triton operation deploys two offshore patrol vessels and
seven patrol boats that monitor Italy’s territorial waters and nearby search
and rescue waters, along with one helicopter and two aircraft in the
Mediterranean. The two airplanes remain
involved in the ongoing search operations
for the missing African migrants led by the Italian Coast Guard.
Frontex
coordinates border surveillance operations at the external borders of the
European Union. Its role is not to replace border control of national
authorities, but to provide those EU countries that face an increased migratory
pressure with additional technical assistance and border guards. When called
upon by the relevant authorities, they take active part in search and rescue
operations, as required by maritime law.
