The number of migrants arriving in Greece in November fell
by more than half from the previous month to 108 000, recording its first
month-on-month drop this year. However, this was still the highest number of
arrivals in Greece in the month of November.The worsening weather conditions, which make it more
dangerous for migrants to cross the sea from Turkey to the Greek islands, are
likely the main reason for the significant decrease in the number of migrants.
Another factor may be the more restrictive border control policy recently
implemented on the Western Balkan route, which has discouraged some of migrants
from making the trip.Despite the slowdown in November, the number of people
landing on the Greek islands rose to more than 715 000 in the first 11 months
of this year, 16 times the figure from the same period of 2014. Syrians
remained the top nationality, followed by Afghans and Iraqis.Central MediterraneanThe number of migrants detected between Libya and Italy decreased
for the fourth consecutive month in November. The number of detection of
illegal crossings on this route stood at 3 200, down by two-thirds from the
previous month. This brought the total for the year so far to 144 000, or 10
percent fewer than in the first 11 months of 2015.Eritrean and Nigerian nationals accounted for the biggest
share of migrants arriving in Italy.Western BalkansThe November detections of illegal crossings at EU’s external
borders in the Western Balkans fell by a fifth from October, reaching 164 000.
In the January-November period, the number of detections at the external
borders in the region reached nearly 667 000, a 22-fold rise when compared to
first 11 months of the previous year.Most of the migrants detected in the Western Balkans on the
Hungarian and Croatian borders with Serbia had previously arrived on one of the
Greek islands. They then left Greece and the EU through the country’s northern
land border with the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and continued
through Serbia to re-enter the EU in Hungary or Croatia.Including the crossings in the Western Balkans, the total
number of detections of illegal border crossings at the EU external borders
stood at 276 000 in November compared to 283 000 in all of 2014. The total
number of detections of illegal border crossings in the first 11 months of 2015
reached 1.55 million. 
Frontex provides monthly data on the number of people
detected at the external borders of the European Union. Irregular border
crossings may be attempted by the same person several times in different
locations at the external border. This means that a large number of the people
who were counted when they arrived in Greece were again counted when entering
the EU for the second time through Hungary or Croatia.
