About the Competition
Frontex is pleased to announce the launch of the European Day for 
Border Guards photo competition for 2013! The aim of the contest is to 
reflect the distinctive nature of European borders across the continent 
and to gather inspiration from the beauty of European landscapes. With 
that in mind, the theme for this year is:
“Ties that Bind: Bridging borders in modern Europe”
While very often presented as barriers between peoples, borders are 
rarely discussed as vitally important crossroads of societal 
integration. All photo submissions should attempt to tackle the meaning 
and impact of frontiers in their role as connectors in a variety of 
forms: physical, psychological, social, cultural, economic and ethnic.
Prizes 
Chosen winners will receive a cash prize of 500 euros (1st place), 
250 euros (2nd place) or 200 euros (3rd place), an opportunity to 
participate in ED4BG in Warsaw, Poland as well as publication of their 
photo in The Border Post magazine. All photos will also be on display at
 the ED4BG conference, which is expected to host well over 700 people 
from across Europe.
How to Enter
To enter the competition, please prepare an email including the following information:
-maximum 2 jpeg format photos (minimum 2500 x 3500 pixels)
-completed entry form 
All submissions should be sent to photo@frontex.europa.eu by the deadline of 30 April 2013 at midnight. Late entries will not be accepted. Please ensure that you have read the photo competition terms and conditions
 before sending your submission. Frontex reserves the right to 
disqualify any contestant who is deemed to be in violation of these 
conditions. 
Judging Criteria
The judges’ panel will consist of 3 Frontex staff as well as one 
independant, professional photographer. The panel  will look for a 
creative, engaging and inspiring photo relevant to the topic of the 
contest listed above.
Specific criteria are as follows:

•   Relevance of your photo to the competition topic
•   Creativity expressed
•   Originality
•   Photographic ability

Winners will be notified via email no later than 13 May, 2013, to ensure adequate time for travel arrangements.

Confidentiality and Protection of Personal Data

The personal data as contained in your submission to this contest 
will be processed in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 45/2001.
The data controller is the Frontex Information and Transparency team 
represented by Izabella Cooper. The data will be processed for the 
purpose of providing for all the practical arrangements relating to your
 participation in the contest and other purposes that may not be deemed 
as incompatible with it. 
The data may be disclosed to other organisational units within 
Frontex insofar as necessary for those purposes, or to third parties, 
subject to respect for Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 and, in cases of a 
request for public access to a document or documents containing such 
data, to Regulation (EC) No 1049/2001.
You have the right to access your data and to obtain rectification of
 inaccurate or incomplete data. Under certain circumstances, you may 
also have the right to obtain blocking or erasure of data and the right 
to object processing. The extent of these rights and the conditions for 
their exercise are laid down in Article 13 to 18 of the Regulation 
mentioned above. You may contact for this purpose Information and 
Transparency by telephone (+48 22 205 9665) or by e-mail (photo@frontex.europa.eu).
If you consider that your rights have been infringed as a result of 
the processing of your personal data, you may lodge a complaint with the
 European Data Protection Supervisor.
