A record number of 49 550 migrants have arrived in the European
Union through the Greek borders in July, surpassing in a single month the
number of migrants detected in the region in the entire 2014.
Even though Italy continues to deal with a massive number of
arriving migrants, in recent months the route through Greece has taken over as
the path into the EU most affected by migration flows.
In the first seven months of 2015, nearly 130 500 migrants
have been detected at Greece’s external borders, a five-fold increase from the
same period of last year. In the entire 2014, the figure in the Eastern
Mediterranean stood at 41 700.
Syrians and Afghans accounted for nine out of every ten
migrants detected at the Greek borders this year. There was also a significant increase
in the number of Pakistani citizens. The migrants, using small rubber and fibre
glass boats, arrive from Turkey on four Greek islands: Lesbos, Chios, Kos and
Samos.
Frontex is coordinating Joint Operation Poseidon Sea 2015 to
assist the Greek authorities in conducting border surveillance along its sea
borders.
“The fact that last month more migrants crossed the Greek
borders than in the entire 2014 only underscores the need for Frontex to assist
Greece in dealing with this crisis. Two months ago we asked for new
contributions to strengthen Poseidon and our operations in Hungary.
Unfortunately, so far we have not received sufficient numbers of equipment and
border guards,” said Frontex Deputy Executive Director Gil Arias Fernandez.
“Despite additional funds, we may not be able help the
countries that need assistance unless we receive the necessary equipment. I
urge EU member states to consider pledging more assets needed by Frontex for
these operations,” he added.
Because of the short distance between Turkey and the Greek
islands, the smugglers cram migrants onto small boats. As a result, border
guards must deal with a large number of incidents every day, including numerous
search and rescue operations.
In operation Poseidon, Frontex currently deploys 11 coastal
patrol boats, two coastal patrol vessels, one offshore patrol vessel, two
helicopters and two aircraft. Frontex screening and debriefing officers also collect
intelligence on the people smuggling networks.
