Warsaw, February 15—Frontex received a formal request for assistance on February 15 from the Italian Ministry of Interior regarding the extraordinary migratory situation in the Pelagic Islands. The Italian Government requested assistance in strengthening the surveillance of the EU’s external borders in the form of a Joint Operation. In addition, Italy requested a targeted risk analysis on the possible future scenarios of increased migratory pressure in the region in the light of recent political developments in North Africa and the possibility of the opening up of a further migratory front in the Central Mediterranean area. Frontex has been monitoring closely the situation in North Africa and its effects on migratory trends in recent weeks and will continue to update the situational picture at the EU external borders as it develops. Planning has been ongoing for several days for a potential response to the situation and will now focus more specifically on Italy’s concrete operational requirements. In the current situation, the Agency foresees its main role as coordinating border guards from among the Member States, particularly with regard to second-line experts in the screening and debriefing of irregular migrants as well as in coordinating an appropriate operational response to the humanitarian needs in the area. In addition, the Agency is investigating the most optimal means by which to adapt a range of technical assets engaged in Sea Border Operations in the Mediterranean to the needs of the Italian authorities.BackgroundAccording to the Italian Ministry of Interior, approximately 6,000 irregular migrants, mostly of Tunisian origin, have arrived on the Italian coast in the last month, of which 3,000 have arrived since February 11. Prior to February 11, only 14 Tunisian nationals had arrived on the Italian coast in 2011. Frontex Executive Director Ilkka Laitinen said: “It gives me great satisfaction to report that during the planning of recent days, the Member States have already shown solidarity with Italy and have started making assets available. I look forward to a strong and united response to the current pressure on the EU border and trust that all needs, both operational and humanitarian, will be met in full.” 
