
The third Annual Report of the
Frontex Consultative Forum on Fundamental Rights provides an overview of the
activities undertaken by the Consultative Forum in 2015. Among its various
activities, the Consultative Forum has observed trainings, visited Joint Operation
Triton, initiated a study on gender mainstreaming in Frontex and participated
in Joint Operation VEGA Children. The report also presents the views and recommendations
shared with Frontex and its Management Board on fundamental right matters
connected to the agency’s activities, as well as an external evaluation of the
Agency commissioned by Frontex and the Management Board.
In 2015, the mandates of some
Consultative Forum member came to an end since their initial appointment in
2012. Most of the members requested and were selected for new three-year terms.
The AIRE Centre, a specialist law centre that helps vulnerable individuals to
assert their rights, also joined the advisory body. 
The report stresses the Consultative
Forum support to the establishment of an individual complaints mechanism in
order to ensure access to justice and effective remedy to those persons affected
by Frontex-coordinated Joint Operations. It also emphasises the need for the
Fundamental Rights Office to be adequately staffed to support further promotion
of respect for fundamental rights in Frontex activities. In addition, the
document also provides an assessment of the impact of enhanced cooperation between
Frontex and non-EU countries.
The publication of this report
is in line with Article 26a of the amended Frontex Regulation. The third Annual
Report of the Consultative Forum was presented to the Frontex Management Board
at its 58th meeting on 30 March 2016.
More information about the Consultative Forum
is available here. 
For further information about the Report, please
contact:
Marta Ballestero, United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) 
Consultative Forum Chair
balleste@unhcr.org
Stefan Kessler, Jesuit Refugee Service
Consultative Forum Co-Chair
stefan.kessler@jrs.net 
Frontex Consultative
Forum Secretariat
consultative.forum@frontex.europa.eu
